hello hello hi everybody can you hear me
yeah
great um
welcome everybody welcome to the nsc
anthropology department
and welcome to our weekly
time-honored research seminar on
anthropological theory
been running since the time of franzlao
malinowski 90 or so odd years i think
um i'm alpha alpha i'm a professor of
anthropology here and i'm sharing this
2021 michaelmas term
seminar series
from today uh we're going to devote the
rest of this term seminars to pay
tribute
to
our dear friend and our colleague david
graber
it's been very difficult for us to come
to terms with david's loss last
september
not only was it uh very sudden and very
shock shocking
it also happened during the time of the
covet
lockdowns when grieving together was so
challenging
and in fact still remains the case for
so many
um
over time i personally have come to feel
that it is true that sometimes the dead
are more alive than the living
and with david one your own it certainly
feels this way and i hope this seminar
series is also a testament to that
uh david joined this department in 2013
i believe he was genuinely happy here
even if sometimes he got annoyed that he
had made an effort to turn up to this
particular seminar but couldn't ask his
question because he raised his hand too
late
um
when david passed away
after the zoom commemoration we held as
a department
we decided that he we would honor his
work in this series
by each week inviting
two relevant leading anthropologists to
critically engage with and comment on
different aspects of it
david was is
a hugely influential public intellectual
and a political activist
but above all he wanted to be seen as an
anthropologist and treated seriously as
an anthropologist
and that is what we will be doing in
this series
david's work was wide-ranging
from debt to pirates bureaucracy to
jobs kings to
reworking the teleological assumptions
of the history of humanity
i'm referring to the important book with
david wengrove which was published on
monday
and which we
launched from the department last week
it's impossible for us to cover
everything in this series but we've
picked
a few of his important works
we begin this week with david's
initiation as an anthropologist his
first book
uh i think the only book that was based
on
you know deep kind of ethnographic
research lost people magic and the
legacy of slavery in madagascar
and that grew out of the field work that
he conducted for his phd
and was published
in 2007
by indiana university press
um we are
very fortunate that professor jonathan
perry and professor morris block who are
both now emeritus professors in the
department
have agreed to tell us about and discuss
this book
uh david saw johnny and morris
as the pair that had together
significantly shaped the anthropology
department here both through their own
research
and their collaboration and their
friendship
uh over two significant anthropological
volumes death and the regeneration of
life and money and morality of exchange
david himself had aspirations at one
point to be creating such collaborations
here himself
um morris was also someone who david
knew extremely well since he was a phd
student
they shared you know the island of
madagascar as a field site
i think david would be truly delighted
smiling with glee in fact to have morris
and johnny commenting on the lost people
so uh jonas and morris um johnny johnny
and morris thank you for taking on this
task
um
which i know uh has been challenging for
both of you for for
similar and different reasons morris is
in fact i hope he's going to be able to
join us
uh he's kind of listening in on my phone
here from her family born in hospital
johnny is um yeah with us right now um
but yes it's been challenging to take
this task on and i suggested to both of
them yesterday that let's just you know
cancel this particular seminar and we
can opt out
but they both insisted that you know
they wanted to be with us today and
proceed
uh
and um i think it's appropriate that we
are doing that its seminar is very much
a kind of ritual event
for us all to be together
and to be with david
um
with and without the limitations of zoom
zoom means that so many more people can
be with us
uh too um
so there's there are many of us today uh
here and it's wonderful to see you all
thank you for coming
um we will have um
you know we will see how the seminar
goes uh uh um we will i will i will pass
it over to
johnny um first uh to tell us about the
book and then hopefully lba but we'll be
able to have morris in some form with us
too
um
and after that we will have questions uh
and please feel uh or comments even you
know i mean comments will probably be
more appropriate please please feel free
to write them out in chat
uh as we go along and we will try to
raise them and also invite some of you
to to raise them
um
before i hand over to johnny and morris
i would like to say a word of thanks
uh to dr giulio ongara ungaro dr megan
laws and dr becky bowers for
brainstorming the series with me
i'd like to say thanks to renata todd in
the department office for ensuring you
know everything that's gone into its
smooth execution
and also to professor mattis parkman's
for helping me behind the scenes and the
hosting of these events
uh thank you all for coming and thank
you maurice and johnny
johnny over to you first
good thanks
am i audible
yeah
so as um
as alpha has said
david's lost people
started life as his um
university of chicago phd thesis
but it wasn't actually published until
2007 when he'd already
put out two important books
to my shame i have to admit that i
hadn't actually read lost people until
alpha twisted my arm to speak on this
occasion
and
having read it i realized how
incompetent i am to talk about it
because i'm not a specialist on
madagascar
and nor am i expert on the literature on
slavery or or on history
a narrative
but it's it's worse than that
something that i've always very much
admired david for
is the incredible clarity of his writing
and his ability to say things that seem
deeply obvious
uh
once he said them but whenever obvious
before or at least uh not to me
and several of uh
the reviewers of lost people
congratulate him on its literary quality
so i guess that i'm out on a limb
because i actually found that by david's
very high standards
uh it was rather heavy going
and it was
the narrative is rather
labyrinthine and the detail distinctly
overwhelming
so i was often not entirely sure that i
was getting the point
david himself describes it as an
experimental book a kind of cross
between an ethnography and a long
russian novel
the aspiration was to produce a dialogic
ethnography
that would do away with the distance
between author and informants that is
created as david sees it by much social
science writing
as i'll later explain he here draws a
sharp distinction between social
scientists and historians
and identifies themselves squarely with
the historians
his sympathies are with what he
represents as old style ethnography
where the objective is to provide a
window on a way of life
rather than to deploy ethnography as
it's currently usual as a prop for some
single theoretical argument
he wants his malagasy interlocutors
to emerge as both actors in history
and as historians
despite the difficulties of his
his text
it's
relatively easy to say what it's
centrally about
and to summarize its main narrative
in case there's anybody present who
hasn't actually read it
or whose memories need refreshing
that's what i'm going to try and do
so it's centrally about slavery
about its local history
and more especially about its
post-abolition legacy
above all that is it's about the past
and present
about the ways in which history impinges
on contemporary relations between people
of free and of slave descent
in a rural area in the western highlands
of madagascar
an hour or so drive from the capital
antananarivo
batafo his field site
is in in marina the old kingdom of the
mariner people
who ruled most of the island in the 19th
century
and of whom morris block has written
with such distinction
david's main window on these slave
descent
ex-noble
relationships
is through the narrative of an ordeal
that was held in 1987
that provoked the ancestors resulted in
disaster for the main protagonists
and ended by dividing the community even
more deeply than this had been divided
before
the this narrative threads all the way
through the book with new
interpretations new perspectives
and new details endlessly piling up
over 400 pages
potafo which is something like a parish
is made up of about
hamlets
scattered
scattered hamlets which have a
population of a floating population of
three to five hundred
it's locally notorious for
uh witchcraft and sorcery
and for the hostility of relations
between its inhabitants
a major reason for selecting it david
reports
in the 1980s it experienced an epidemic
of petty thefts
the village assembly decided to hold an
ordeal to identify the culprits
the villagers were to drink water in
which earth from the ancestors tombs had
been dissolved
but since they weren't all of the same
ancestry
there were nobles and ex-slaves
who were in principle totally separate
groups between whom marriage was
theoretically impossible
the earth should come from two separate
tombs
and even that
was a political fudge
uh for the reason that not all
the people of slave descent were of one
descent group
so that's how the procedure adopted
for
the ordeal made them appear
nor was this provocative mixing of the
earth the only dangerous blunder
it turns out that both of the elders who
instigated and organized the ordeal
one noble one slave
had recently taken a wife from the other
group
they were guilty of mixing bodily fluids
and bloods as well
no wonder disaster followed
the rice had just been harvested and
were still in the fields
a flash flood swept it away
actually it later transpired that it was
only the crops of the two elders that
were completely destroyed
this was in 1987.
david started his research three years
later
and witnessed the aftermath
the ordeal which had been intended to
reassert communal solidarity
had provoked a definitive rift
now blacks
slave descendants were avoiding white
that is noble parts of batafo
and were exploiting their reputation for
magical powers and knowledge of local
taboos
to harass and constrain batafo nobles
who had moved
who had moved to the capital
but who were now
threatening to return to the village and
resume their lands
in
parenthesis i should perhaps say that by
standards elsewhere
the levels of the antagonism seem fairly
muted
returning nobles might be told that
there was a taboo on taking water from a
particular spring
but they weren't physically attacked or
forcibly prevented from moving back home
intermarriage was anathematized
but we nevertheless here of quite a few
instances
none had resulted in murder
nor even in serious boycott
compare rural bihar or haryana where
couples who have contracted such serious
misalliances
could never be sure of their safety
even in 18th century madagascar slavery
and slave trading had a prominent role
in many local economies
in the 19th century however
uh slavery really took off in a spec
spectacular way in a marina
after the british had done a deal with
the man a king
by which he agreed to halt the
international trade of slaves for guns
on the understanding that the british
would give him the guns anyway
and would not supply his rivals
that enabled the mayan estate to
dominate most of the island
and to capture more and more slaves
they were deployed on public works and
in agriculture in the
mariner heartlands from where more and
more mana went as soldiers
later in the century
perhaps as many as half of the marina's
population were slaves according to
bloch
it was in any event an enormous
proportion
and that had a profound impact on
mariner society and cultural
representations
the french annexed madagascar in 1895
and abolished slavery in 1897.
from batalfo many notables moved off to
the capital to join the civil service
a few to paris
their former slaves became their
sharecroppers and generally thrived
that was widely attributed to their
manipulation of their magical powers
the downward mobility of many nobles was
put down to the sins of slavery
even by the nobles themselves
nobles were increasingly deeply divided
between the rich elite who largely moved
out and the poor who largely remained
david offers a vivid picture of just how
opulent and aristocratic these rich
nobles were in the early years of the
colonial period
with their twilight parties music and
dancing and their colorful
silk garments and golden diadems
still at the still at the time of his
field work emmy gray nobles would
descend on batarfo in numbers to collect
a share of the harvest or to bury some
kinsmen in the ancestral tomb
when the corpse was thrown in from paris
the paths were
jammed with cars and vans
and in their hundreds everywhere around
the tomb were knots of grave-looking men
in three-piece suits with expensive
watches
ladies in salt dresses pearls gold and
silver jewellery
within village society however
the fundamental
division regardless of class
remains that between andreana
nobles and endeavour slaves
though the topic of slavery was avoided
nobody could ever forget it and slaves
were still associated with pollution and
ideas of contamination
crucially however the situation of many
of these emigrate nobles became
seriously precarious after the 1972
revolution
subsequent to it the peasant sector was
badly neglected
the government took vast loans for
development which it could not service
resulting in insolvency
dependence on the imf
structural adjustment
the slashing of state budgets the
withdrawal of welfare and services from
the countryside
a catastrophic collapse in living
standards
and widespread popularization
the state largely withdrew from places
like batafo leaving them as temporary or
autonomous zones
at the same time many metropolitan civil
servants were badly impoverished and
were tempted to move back to their
ancestral villages to resume the land
that their ex-slave sharecroppers had
been cultivating
and that of course is the essential
background to the tensions that resulted
from the batafa ordeal
at the heart of david's book
what that background significantly
qualifies as it seems to me
is david's claim to represent his
informants as both actors in history
and as historians
of course
they're actors in a limited sense
but as actors they're highly constrained
and they have little autonomy
by that i mean to suggest that the most
important part of the story this
explains why battalfo zandriana and
andevo are at each other's throats
takes place
off stage
between the malagasy state and the imf
in the capital
and its corridors of power
that is what really drives the story
and that bit of it is pure graber
it has no part in his informants
narratives
which are as it were epiphenomenal
they're a derivative discourse that is
somehow beside the main point
as historians
they were severely limited by having no
access to sources that would give them a
proper handle on that crucial background
that's no doubt a rather crude way of
introducing a more general reservation
about david's preoccupation with
narrative
nobody could possibly doubt its
importance for history and politics
but lost people repeatedly seems to
claim that that is what history and
politics are
i worry that that leaves an awful lot
out
if history is mainly as david says it is
about the circulation of stories
what of all the ecological
epidemiological and demographic
influences on our lives of which we are
often unconscious
if political action is i quote action
that is intended to be recorded or
narrated or in some way represented to
others afterwards
what kind of action is all that effort
that goes into ensuring that so many of
the deeds and misdeeds of our rulers are
never recorded
representations discourses and
narratives
are unarguably important
but they should not in my view be
allowed to occupy all the space in an
anthropological analysis
in a podcast discussion of david's deck
book chaired by jillian turt
some time after his death
one contributor astutely observed
that if there's one value that informed
his work
it's that of freedom
that made me wonder how lost people fits
in
though it says little about freedom
explicitly
the ethnography overwhelmingly suggests
its absence
this is a society that seems entirely
unable to escape its past
in david's other writings there is
usually some possibility of escape from
oppression that is provided by other
ideological alternatives
here the past seems almost inescapably
tyrannical
the mariner condemned to continually
renew the legacy of guilt and resentment
that stems from their history of slavery
and whether or not david intended us to
put the two things together
his ethnography also shows that the
burden of
the past goes well beyond that
the mariner ancestors play a significant
role in the lives of their descendants
and in bloc's writings
the role of these the influence of these
ancestors is somewhat equivocal but it's
mainly benign
in lost people
the ancestors come over as distinctly
threatening
they're always telling
the living what they can't do
and they're regularly attacking them
that provokes the resentment and
hostility of the living
which are dramatically expressed in the
secondary burial when the ancestral
remains are assaulted their bones are
crushed up their dust is banned tightly
in wrappings and they're securely locked
back in their tombs once more
history it seems is some kind of prison
against the walls of which the living
can only bang their heads
marx had already summed it up
brilliantly
the tradition of the
the tradition of all the dead
generations
weighs like a nightmare on the brains of
the living
all that prompts a
series of comparative questions that i
think
important but that david passes by
largely i suspect because they fall
outside the narrative frame of his
informants
crucially
why
well
well after a century since manumission
by the mariner still so obsessed by
slavery
partly no doubt on account of its scale
and its cruelty
but there's surely more to it than that
recent contributions to the regional
literature
have drawn attention to wide variations
between malagasy societies in the degree
to which slave descent remains
stigmatized
and the extent to which they appear to
be haunted by its history
and in whether they're willing to speak
of this at all
margaret brown
and denny renyer and dominique sonder
make brave stabs as
specifying the conditions that might
explain that variation
differences in social structure
resources
ethnic mixing and migration and
according to whether the slaves were of
malagasy or of african origin
well luke freeman writes illuminatingly
about the mandatory silence on the
subject on the subject of slavery
amongst his betsolayo informants
and of how that silence re-entrenches
the stigma of slavery by making it uh
literally unspeakable
moving right across to the other side of
the indian ocean
the legacy of slavery in sri lanka is
dramatically different
according to nero
recent book
the collective memory of slavery
has in sri lanka been almost
totally obliterated
true it was never on quite the same
scale and it was in abolished some
decades earlier than in madagascar
but on her analysis on this wrong side
the comparison would have to include the
way in which the creolization brought
about by slavery
seriously challenged doctrines of racial
purity in the south
and the way in which the enslavement of
tamil untouchables by high caste tamil
valalas
subverted later political projects of
tamil nationalism in the north
but questions of that comparative order
are no part of david's
inquiry the broader terrain on which he
does locate his study my final
observation
concerns rather the relationship between
history and the social sciences
i confess i find his pitch a bit
puzzling and i'm hoping someone might
help me clarify it
what he postulates is a broad contrast
between the concerns of social science
which have primarily to do with patterns
of regularity and predictability
and the concerns of history which deals
with the irregular and the unpredictable
it's the record of those actions
which are some which are not simply
cyclical representative or inevitable
anthropology should in line itself with
history
that seems to be above all because it's
the very concern with science laws and
regularities that's been responsible for
creating the sense of distance that
david says he's been trying so hard to
face
it is paradoxically enough
the desire to seem objective that has
largely been responsible for creating
the impression
that the people we study are some exotic
alien
ultimately unknowable other
personally i don't believe any of that
but what interests me more is whether
you might be able to tell me whether
this disciplinary opposition has
resonances in david's other work
or is it as i suspect
an opportunistic an opportunistic answer
to the requirements that he justify and
explain the literary style he's adopted
in writing this book
certainly his book on debt seems to be
larded with social science type
propositions
about repressitive
patterns
slavery played a key role in the rise of
markets everywhere
bullying currency predominates in
periods of generalized violence
coinage slavery markets in the state go
inexorably together
and so on
thank you
thank you thank you johnny um for
raising a
whole number of questions about the lost
people for taking this task
so seriously as david would have wanted
and um
uh and and i'm hoping that there are
people in this room who are going to
help us
address some of some of the questions
that johnny raises
um
before we do that
engage in a conversation i'm going to
try to
i'm going to hand over to morris who is
actually here on this phone
uh listening in we we've been unable to
uh get him on the zoom conversation but
i think maurice has heard morris have
you heard what johnny said
most of it okay so now um can people
hear morris if he speaks on this phone
maurice can you speak please
here i speak
maybe a little bit further take a bit
further away like that maybe let's try
it
great i am confident that we can make
this work i've been doing these
extraordinary interviews in india with
translators and all on like whatsapp and
and and um with translator in another in
one place part of india and me here and
anyway um we can make this work maurice
yes
well if you can hear me
i can hear you i i think that the crowd
can hear you too so i think over to you
maurice please
yes
uh you the floor is yours
all right um
i i i'm not sure how you how much you
can hear me know how much you so you
know about madagascar
but let me say
one
a few general things
the area where david was working
was an area which if you looked at it
locally
was being taken over
by the descendants of slaves
who were
themselves being infiltrated by
outsiders
and therefore um
and who are
as hard as they could
trying not to have themselves identified
as slaves
so there's one group which is which
looks very very successful in in david's
work
which is
basically the defense of slaves taking
over the area
the other group
are
hardly present
apart from
some of david's friends
and they are
the descendants of free people
who
either have gone back to the
countryside
and seemed to have very little influence
or are
in
the capital under the narrative
or in france
so
the story is basically
of
these people
retreating
while the sense of the slaves
taking over
this would be very simple
if
that was all there was to it
but of course
the area that david was working in was
part
of
changing the madagascar situation
the big changes
were
the government
is becoming more and more close
to the sense of slaves
and trying to do in
as much as they could
for free
neither
continually trying to
identify themselves
with
none
away from their safe ancestry
and more
linked up
with
people from outside
the area
the sense of the free
are not successful because they're just
leaving
the only
sense of the free that they are in the
area where david was working
were a few
failures
who had to come back
because they had nowhere else to go
so
if this was the whole story the story is
very simple
it is of the descendants of the series
taking over
an area
things are however are not so simple
and also simple because this is
madagascar and tombs are very very
important
and
so
uh
the
census slaves
and
other people as well mixed in with them
are
you can be seen
uh
trying to take the place over
the sins of the free
are only interested
in the tombs
and and the the people who were buried
there
neither side are going to win
and in the side did win
in terms of the sense of um uh
slaves
do succeed in taking
the rice fields the uh
the means of production
over
and controlling them uh
away
from those few ozone swords
who were
coming back
defeated
basically
to the area
yet there's something odd about the book
and the book
really
wants to talk about the sense of the
slaves
that in fact talks most of the time
about the defense of the three who are
these defeated
uh
people
who are just coming back
so this is
so locally
the situation is simple
it's uh the sense of slaves who
were taking over
the sense of the free
are
being
pushed out
there's however of a complication
and that is
the
the sense of the free
are
uh
linked
with the great tombs that were once uh
in the area
and
which was sort of haunting the place
uh
all the time
is
haunting
by the descendants of the three
uh
seems to have a little significance for
most of the story
until
uh
the
descendants of the slaves
get above their status
they want to take the place over
the descendants of a free
uh
that's trying to reassert the status
and to a certain extent they succeed in
doing so
they are very largely outside
the area where david worked
they are in
the capital internation indeed quite a
lot of them in france
and
they already couldn't care less
about the sense of the slaves
so locally
the sense of the slaves seem to be
winning or
seems to be winning you know
on a wider scale but the sense of the
three a sort of haunting replace
haunting it
until they actually come back
into the ancestral rituals
which are being organized
what the descendants of the slaves are
hoping
is that they can somehow
take over
these ancestral rituals
and
dominate
that way
through the
power
of the descendants of the three
they fail it fails totally for various
reasons which are
well explained in the book
uh the sins of the free on the other
hand
turn up
uh at these great rituals in their cars
in their bands
trying to impress the locals as much as
possible
and
to a certain extent
succeed
behind that there's a there's a shadow
that is a state which actually
now is on the side of the
sense of the slaves
so
the third element
of the people in the two the dead people
who are uh being activated
by um
or being activated
by the descendants of the free
it's the conflict between all these
three groups which have quite different
interests
which
is a story for books
largely
it talks about
the sense of the slaves winning
because they are winning locally
it also
and certainly the other three
which are there are definitely not
willing there are sort of
odds and sorts
and there's a third group which is
almost outside the area where they've
been worked
which is in ternary and partly in france
which are
much more
much better educated
much richer
and much more powerful
so in the end the story is
these this these outsider groups coming
for the rituals
are going to be
taking over
three groups
one
local
where the slaves are winning
then the free
where the
descendants of the free or just almost
an irrelevance
and thirdly
the tombs
which
the ancestors of the free are
there
through which
they are going to exercise
a local
local power
that's a very very complete
situation
made much more complicated
by the fact that political changes
are taking place in madagascar
during the whole of this period
maurice thank you
thanks so much um
for
actually providing the kind of wider
frame to
what what is going on in this very
complex book i wanted to um start the
conversation by
asking you whether
you may be able to uh enlighten us on
some of the issues raised by johnny
um which is can you can you tell us a
little bit more about the comparative
uh
that the side where where um where david
was
how does the situation of slaves compare
with you know the other um
ethnographies we have
in madagascar luke freeman
um
danny rainier renier dominic sander i
mean how you know if we think about
david's situation in a comparative
context uh the questions that johnny was
you know uh saying are kind of basically
missing in david's consideration of
course some of these people
writing after david i mean can you what
light does the work of these other
ethnographies
shed on on the particularity
or the similarity of david's uh own uh
research context
well
david's
david's uh
work
was
local in in many ways it's very much
focused
on
where he was
so
he's oscillates between
uh
the success that
the slaves were having locally
and
the haunting
of
the ex
free
in the rest of
the rest of madagascar
and indeed even in france
do it man
yes yeah okay mars we can pick up um
maybe on some of this uh later
all the other relevant uh all the others
you mentioned
are irrelevant
even my ethnography
because it was because my ethnography
concerns an area where there were no
established
uh
laws
with their tools
okay um thanks thanks morris we we can
we it would be good to continue this but
there are so many people in the room
with us
who i'm sure have got uh
comments things that they would like to
address talk about um we decided earlier
that if you could please put your
comments in the chat and we will we will
ask you um uh to look to
to um we will raise some of them from
the chat to be raised in the in the room
itself
um
while people are kind of gathering their
thoughts i wondered if i could invite
david wengrove
into the conversation
um because um i know i know david that
you have to go soon but i think one of
the issues that johnny raises
at the end of his conversation it would
be at the end of his discussion it would
be wonderful for us to have
your insights into
uh into into the final issue that johnny
raised in relation to his observations
about david's perspectives on the
relationship between history and the
social sciences now this is clearly
something that you would have talked
about or where you would have addressed
or you would have would have been in the
sidelines of the writing of the dawn of
everything
and
um
you know
johnny's just to remind you of the earth
yeah okay so what what then is you know
what then is the relationship between
history and social sciences and how does
that inform the writing of the dawn of
everything is it
is it in line with what johnny suggested
was the case in the lost people or have
perspectives changed what what what you
know what what is what is the what is
the relationship
i'm i'm surprised that that um johnny
pulled that out as a particular issue
from this book which i i had to go back
to and try to start rereading it's a
long time
since i looked at uh at it um
it seems to me from other things i've
been reading
from contemporary anthropologists um the
the
the big sort of surprising issue
methodologically here
is that on the one hand we've got social
anthro am i audible by the way i better
just check yes we've got social
anthropologists all over the place i've
been reading pieces by james laidlaw
joel robbins webb keane claiming that
anthropology has social anthropology has
had nothing to say about freedom
but here we've got
two eminent social anthropologists
talking about a book written a long time
ago as if it's perfectly obvious that
here we have a rich
ethnography and ethno history of freedom
so i'm not sure what to make of that
they can't all be right
but if
lost people
is that
then i think the relationships to
david's later work and his much more
generalizing
work on history
becomes a bit clearer because what he's
describing here with a rich historical
background that that morris has helped
to flesh out
is a moment in time as johnny says you
know a century after manumission may not
be a very long time in in structural and
psychological terms
uh even after the material conditions of
slavery are gone
um i think an interesting way to read
david's ethnography in light of what he
went on
to to write about in debt and in our
work and in other places
is uh
what are the non-material conditions
that prevent a a discourse on freedom
from emerging and something he went back
to a lot in his later writings
is the really durable structural effects
of concepts of freedom such as those of
the european
tradition which are rooted in slave
relations so even after the material
it's not his point entirely it's a point
that was famously made by the jamaican
sociologist who was at lse in fact
orlando patterson in a number of books
in the 70s and 80s
that
the effects of slavery on european
concepts of freedom are still present in
in our systems of law
which are essentially the freedoms of
the master
their their abstract legal freedoms
which presuppose the existence of slaves
in households and in in the wider
economy even when those slaves are no
longer that even when they are
theoretically free people
um
so these are freedoms based on uh or at
the expense of another's captivity or
another's suffering um and i i think at
least to my mind what i can detect
in this ethnography uh are the
beginnings of an interest in what
another form or other forms of freedom
might be
which are not bad but as johnny conveys
what what david seems to be describing
is a moment in time
uh in which those haven't emerged and it
would be a false projection presumably
on his part as the ethnographer to then
claim that they exist or claim that he
could predict their emergence what he's
describing as you say are people who
seem imprisoned by their past but maybe
that unwillingness to actually develop
concepts of freedom
which
are in a sense transformations and
extensions of the slave master
relationship could in itself
be significant
in that way in other words i'm
suggesting that perhaps what he's uh
what he's coming to understand or trying
to to get to grips with here is is
precisely why those um
kind of
forms of freedom and not
emerging
um and that that in itself may be
interesting or significant by contrast
with our own uh broadly western european
notion of freedom rooted in
ancient roman law ancient greek law via
various medieval intermediaries if that
makes sense at all so it's not a direct
answer to johnny's point but it didn't
strike me that that was
the sort of burning question
thanks david yeah you've taken us to
freedom but i guess the point that i was
picking up from johnny was the
relationship between history i know
i know i just think i think although
those sorts of debates are not not
hugely interesting i mean
you know david was often struck by the
profound absurdity and silliness of
people who sort of you know they do
things that look scientific and there's
lots of graphs and statistics but
essentially what they're doing
is uh predicting things that have
already happened you know it's the point
that erwin panovsky famously made that
you know with the sciences everything's
uh everything's alive and in motion the
job of the scientist is to sort of
temporarily freeze it so you get a sort
of snapshot whereas with the historian
everybody's dead and the historian's job
is to bring it to life and and you know
there's no getting around that um it's
it's just hermeneutic
it's just a fact of research
so um you know what what i see in
david's book is an unwillingness to
simplifying an unwillingness to set up
her
pretentious uh sorts of
boundaries to his work it's a very
vulnerable kind of ethnography you know
he talks about people with his friends
yeah just to add one thing here
and that is that locally
the descendants of slaves mixed with
other people from outside
are winning
they're not
because
the people in the tombs
are linked with people
who
are dominant in the capital
and indeed
internationally
i guess that's the point that johnny was
also making that the wider structural
forces are taking place off stage you
know the imf um what's happening you
know that these guys have gone off to
paris and are actually holding court
from there and
over whatever they would like to hold
caught over
um productive assets can be handed over
to the descendants anyway we have
actually got people from the floor um
foreign you had raised your hand first
so can you please unmute yourself and i
know you put your comment in the in the
in the chat as well but it would be
great to hear from you directly
first
uh sure i think josh
coming in first but uh unless they want
to speak on that i had raised your hand
first that's why i'm calling you up
um
yeah i mean as i said in the comments
just some some thoughts in terms of the
questions that johnny raised at the end
and it does seem to me that the question
of genre
mode of writing a genre is completely
key to understanding at least that
aspect of lost people
um
i mean some of some of this is coming
from having talked with david and
particularly david's insistence on
putting a week into the intro to
anthropological theory course that we
talked together on dialogism
um
and at the time before i'd read lost
people i i was interested but i didn't
fully understand why he was so insistent
on this being a part of it
latterly it made a lot more
sense to me and it seems to me that the
kind of question of what
generically what the book is doing
is quite key on two ways one in terms of
the question of historical actors and
his interlocutors or class of characters
as historical actors it put me in mind
of david scott's work on the grenadine
revolution and david scott in that piece
in that book talks a lot about his key
figures as these tragic figures in a
very strongly generic sense that they
put into motion through their political
choices precisely
the elements which will then bring their
own personal downfall and scott's point
on this is that really to act in the
world in this kind of strongly agenda
sense is to open yourself up to that
possibility in the future um
for david i think the kind of point is
much more
as
morris was saying a very very a more
local version of this but nevertheless i
think there's a way to read the events
of 1987 and david then walking into the
aftermath of that as one way of of
reading people and how they were
interacting with one another and how
they fit into the narrative of the story
that david is telling right that they
chose to to act in this way and here are
the consequences that are being drawn up
by david in this strongly
inter-subjective narrative mode literary
mode right
secondly um
i think there's there's a point
to be raised in terms of political
dialogism strongly
um
which is that
uh
in the book and more broadly
david
introduction this is a sort of a
narrative a dialogic attempt to write an
ethnography and that um knowledge and
people's interactions have been produced
in the very very conversational mode
that he's involved in but people are
with each other and there's a lot of
speech in the book right and i think
that does
link possibly more strongly to other of
david's work and david's interests
because
in a way the ways in which people in
batava understand what is happening is
the product of these inter-subjective
interactions contentious as they might
be and it's that that produces knowledge
meaning for them that's not to say that
everything that is structurally
happening and impinging upon them is not
real or in a sense
um conditioning what's happening but it
is that
it seems to me anyway that the book is
david trying to understand how people
create meaning for themselves in this
situation one
if you like tragically where they are
not fully in control of what is
happening but their own actions have
been a part of how things then work out
for them um in this period of time and
the kind of expanse of the book so i
think genre is hugely important and the
genre that david is trying to write in
and drawing from is hugely important i
guess the sort of question back more
broadly and maybe the question back to
johnny would be
how much does that matter
does that kind of strongly generic
element um invalidate the book add to it
um does it then raise questions back to
the kind of broader claims that david
makes in the introduction and then i
think in the conclusion too about the
book's um allegiance with history as
opposed to social science perspectives
you know i think it maybe raises more
questions of how it fits but i think the
genre element is key to understanding
what david was doing in the book and why
the book looks the way that it does
thanks for it um uh i'm i i'm actually
gonna ask uh yash lad and megan laws to
to also raise their their questions or
comments before i'll turn back to johnny
and
morris at the end to
you know uh add any extra additional
reflections i was
and just
thinking about what you said for um i
think that's really interesting and
a good way to think about the book but
at the same time
i remember her on reading the book and
also speaking to david about it that how
much of the narrative is actually
very dependent on uh
one particular
you know one particular person he was
very close to and who helped him with so
much of the research actually two people
in particular so that how you know what
happens to the dialogic nature of
the production of the
the narrative and the script um yeah but
i just add very very quickly on that
point that i think that's another link
possibly to certain kinds of russian
literary writing this is not something i
know huge amounts about but these sort
of petty known
the world around them is changing this
has been a very strong
figure in russian sort of writing of the
19th century and we do have like morris
was saying those kinds of figures who
are also present and it might even
explain to a degree what morris was um
raising about the fact that we hear far
more from those figures the sort of
descendants of sort of free people who
are really incidental in a sense the
broader story they're not descendants of
slaves yet we hear so much more from
them i wonder whether that might be a
reason as well as ketologists too but
anyway
thanks um yes lad would you mind unfeet
uh unmuting yourself and and
sure thing sure thing
um i purchased my videos of my
connections a little shaky but uh yeah i
think this question might be slightly
tangential to the discussion we are
having but i was mostly interested in um
just the question of ancestral authority
so you know i think morris mentioned how
the tombs of uh the uh ancestors of the
nobles sanction the freedom their
freedom within the village itself
and at the same time i think within the
ethnography david mentions the family
hang
where they take out the corpses of their
ancestors and dance with them and
david's reading of that is it's almost
an attempt to
uh speeding up the turning of the
corpses into dust you know so as to
escape the weight
of the ancestors
so i've just been wondering if there's a
contradiction thereby on the one hand
the ancestors seem to sanction some sort
of freedom freedom for the descendants
of the nobles but at the same time the
nobles seem to be
trying to free themselves from the
ancestral authority
uh through ceremonies like from the
hunts so
that was just my question to see if
there's a contradiction there there's
more to it you know
thanks yash and then over to megan
before i hand over to johnny and morris
megan
yeah sorry just like a small comment um
i did yeah i think that just picking up
on what david was saying um david wenger
sorry
about what david might have been trying
to do in the book with regards to
freedom is that it seems to me that um
and i don't know how this fits in with
the broader criticism of evidence that
johnny is maybe
you know bringing to the fore that we
might return to in later sessions uh
during the seminar series but he's he's
quite um kind of optimistic or trying to
be more optimistic and focus on
by focusing on the kind of
legacy of these
of these uh narratives
you know and saying that um that they
have this sort of force he's sort of
also entertaining the reverse which is
that we could we could do away with
those narratives right and i think that
the descendants of slaves are then you
know as as maurice says
are trying to to achieve that they're
trying to do away with the kind of
narratives that then
um shape their lives in particular ways
and in ways that they don't want them to
right so
and you see this a lot in in a lot of
david's work that he's trying to
essentially tell us that
um you know we could do things
differently right that comes up a lot in
in his work and he's trying to explore
the role that narrative plays in that
process now what johnny's criticism
seems to raise to me is this broader
question of the kind of conditions under
which
we we find it possible to do that which
i think also comes up in in the most
recent book you know when i'm thinking
about um you know some of the
sort of arguments around around freedom
um i and i'm thinking about it in terms
of my own research i'm sort of struck
with this feeling of like well why why
do people not do that you know why is it
why is it actually that we don't don't
do that so there seem to be some kind of
conditions of possibility maybe for
for actually doing away with narrative
and that seems in that sense or doing
away with with certain narratives and um
and yeah so i think that yeah there's
there's some sort of tension there
basically that i think is is uh yeah and
david's approach is like well we need to
focus on narrative because we tend to
to overlook it its power or centrality
also it's worth saying uh just adding to
to johnny's comment i think david said
once that uh this book was about 800
pages long when he first sent it to
indiana university press so you got the
short version of
this yeah thanks megan i think that's
that's very that's very useful actually
um okay um we have uh just a few minutes
left before the end of the seminar so
i'm going to hand over to um johnny and
then morris for any last reflections if
they if they have any um
johnny over to you first
you need to unmute yourself johnny
no we can't hear you
yes
now we can hear you now you can start
thank you i i found all the comments
really very very interesting i just
respond to three of them very briefly
going backwards megan
um
i i
very central in debt for example
is
that things could be done differently
there's all these three fundamental
principles that organize the economy and
they can all be used to criticize each
other and so on but what i missed from
lost people was that kind of space it
seems to me that
where in lost people is that space
represented and drawing attention to
um i don't see it it's terribly
optimistic all i see is these poor
people endlessly reproducing this
antagonism through the generations
so that's my response to megan to yash
um
yeah i think that what david is is very
strongly drawing attention to which i it
comes across to me slightly differently
from reading morris
is just how
nasty these ancestors are i mean
in morris
perhaps they're quite ambivalent but
they're always
blowing water on people and giving them
blessings david's ancestors
uh basically you know
are
um
thoroughly disliked it seems to me
there's a real sense of aggression
against them in the in the secondary
burial
uh
to foreign i entirely agree that the
the mode of writing is
is absolutely key
um
but there was a question about
uh
it's consequences and i think that its
consequences are the stress on
narratives
to me
means that an awful lot that is
sociologically anthropologically
important
gets framed out of the fundamental
questions and that's why
what i was trying to draw attention to
were the comparative questions that i
was asking
plus
thanks johnny morris
would you like to add anything to
to close the conversation off
well
i think it's important to bear in mind
it's a double
uh colonial situation
the
the descendants of
the slaves and other people mixed in
are fighting
uh
the previous owners of the land
and
uh
yes
so they're fighting them
but in fact that's not where the the
real fight is the real fight
is between the more urban people
and um
more urban people
and and local local people
the
more urban people
in in madagascar
who were talked about by david are total
failures
okay morris thank you um
uh with that at 12 15 i want to thank
everybody
for coming on board today thank you so
much um i want to thank johnny and
morris and literally i've spent the
whole night thinking we're not we don't
have a seminar we can't possibly have
this seminar but we're here and we've
had this extraordinary conversation
which has definitely made me understand
and think about this book in ways that i
i haven't before and so i'm really
really grateful uh to johnny and
tomorrows and to all of you uh for
participating so thank you so much next
week we have chris gregory who is here
with us today and don cobb on value
and i look forward to seeing you
next week thank you everybody